
马一平    了了罗汉
Ma Yiping    On Arhat

自言自语
Soliloquy

绘画，对于我而言仅是一种乐趣，是觉得有意思而为之，它是自己生活的一部分，但不是全部，因为在世间还有比画画更有意义的事。
For me, painting is joy. I do it just for fun. It is a part of my life, but not all of it. There are more meaningful things in the world than paining.

影像时代的到来，早已使绘画失去了它曾经的辉煌，绘画已经不再是视觉艺术的主流。
In photo-image time, painting has alreay lost its glory of old days. It has been dethroned from the mainstream of visual arts.

作为艺术的一种，绘画曾经为宗教，为政治，为活着的人，也为死去的人，充当了重要的文化角色。
As a kind of art, painting once played an important cultural role for religion and politics, for the living and the dead.

然而，随着数码技术的迅速发展，电子媒材的出现，使当代艺术观念发生了巨大变化，影像已经占据了我们大部分的视娱领地。
As the rapid development of digital technology, however, electronic media has changed concept of contemporary art a lot. Photo-image has occupied most space of our vision.

当我们面对传统绘画艺术的时候，所剩下的也就仅仅是一种精神向往的留恋。
When we face the traditional painting, it only remains a lingering spiritual yearning.

当然，这并不妨碍艺术家仍在继续进行当下的绘画艺术创作，因为大多数人正是这些精神产品的追随者。
But it can not stop artists from painting, because most people are actually the followers of these spiritual products.

自己最早绘画是学习传统工笔牡丹，因为生长在牡丹之乡菏泽，后来受董青源（董超）老师影响学习现代派油画，皈依佛门后就偏佛教题材了。
Grown up in Heze, the home of peony, I learned traditional Chinese realistic painting on peony at the beginning of my career. Then, I was influenced by Mr Dong Qingyuan (Dong Chao), learning modern oil painting. After becoming a Buddhist, most of my painting works are on the theme of Buddhism.

我的绘画过程基本是随着环境和生活的变化而进行，本书所版罗汉图也都是近几年习练贯休罗汉之收获。
My painting career is going with the change of my life and the environment. All the arhat painting works in this book are collected from the painting practices imitating Master Guanxiu's works during these years. 

艺术终究还是人的艺术，无论高低无论俗雅都是应人应时之产物。
Art, on earth, is of people. Therefore, it should always comply with the people and the time, no matter it is highbrow or lowbrow, refined or vulgar.



关于罗汉，法书说属小乘，虽皈依多年却不敢妄谈佛法。罗汉无学，断除烦恼六根清净之成就，非我等俗人所能及也。
According to Theravada Buddhism, arhat has attained nirvana and enlightenment, which our common people can not easily reach. Although it has been a long time since I become a Buddhist, I am still far from being proficient on Dharma.

学习画罗汉仅是因缘之合，应该是源于皈依也源于收藏。
Learning arhat painting is because the Karma of being a Buddhist, as well as my collection hobby.

因多年来偏爱造像残石，所以对罗汉造像颇感兴趣，
My interests in arhat painting came from years of painting experiences on bizarre rocks.

先摹贯休后习墓壁，多年临篆所得笔法常常流露于罗汉勾勒，虽内心追求佛家之境界，可画里凸显的仍然是随心所欲，
I firstly imatated Master Guanxiu's works and then learned from the paintings on ancient tomb walls. These experiences help me a lot on arhat painting. A casual and unrestrained style highlights my painting works, although I try to persuit the buddhist realm.

因多年从事于油画创作之故，画面设色仍摆脱不了西方绘画之影响，对于传统笔墨趣味性缺少把玩之功，加上自身对中国传统绘画程式化的抵触，所作罗汉之图大多随意涂抹并无章法。
Because I worked many years on oil painting, the color of my painting work cannot get rid of the influence of western art. The lacking of study on Chinese traditional painting and my rejection against its stylization make the style my arhat works more casual.


在此感谢老师们的多年教诲及藏家的支持与厚爱！
I want to thank my teachers for giving me instructions during these years, and thank the collectors for their support and great kindness.








水墨罗汉与其说是“书写”，不如说是“抒写”，
马一平是用一种最为直率的方式，直接呈现充满了自性意趣的禅宗意象。
It is better to say "expressing" rather than "drawing" on Ma Yiping's arhat painting, because he presents a Zen image full of selfness in a most straightforward way.

真者马一平 ：罗汉抒写自性
孟宪平  甲午
A Genuine Painter Ma Yiping: Expressing Selfness on Arhat Painting
Meng Xianping 2015




邂逅马一平笔下的水墨罗汉，是在去年隆冬参加海代美术馆举办的一次当代油画展上。
I firstly saw Ma Yiping's arhat painting was in a contemporary oil painting exhibition in Haidai Museum of Art last winter.

二十多位油画家在老马古色古香的美术馆会客厅欢聚一堂，休息之际四处踱步，不经意间被墙上悬挂的一幅罗汉吸引。
During the exhibition, more than twenty painters gathered in the museum's reception room. When I walked around during the break, an arhat painting on the wall attracted me.

见人物长眉及膝，蹙额耸臂，形容实在怪异；然而画面色墨简淡，笔法飘忽，却有一种不经意为之而得天趣之妙。
The arhat in the painting is really weired-looking: he has a frowning forehead, shrugging arms and the long eyebrow hairs reaching to the knee. However, with quietly elegant color and casual brushwork, the painting is exquisite and delicate.

品味言谈间才知道，落款“自了山人”原来就是马一平 。这使我颇感惊讶和不解。
After a discussion with other painters, I realized this painting, which signatured "Zi Liao Shan Ren", is Ma Yiping's work. It made me feel puzzled and a little bit shocked.

从一年前初识到现在成为朋友，这个疑问一直没有得到完全的解答：一个几十年里靠着西方美学作为理论支持，坚持用浓重的油彩描绘、阐述观看到和体验到的现实生活和生命的油画艺术家，何以对传统水墨有如此驾轻就熟的把握，对禅宗意象有如此撼人心魄的体悟？

And till now, we have become close friends, a question remains unsolved: why a oil painter, who has regarded western aesthetics as theoretical support for decades, insisting using vivid oil paint to express his real life experience, can be so familiar with the traditional Chinese ink painting, and can profoundly comprehend the Zen image?






马一平的艺术和心性中有一种内在的矛盾，一种朝向两个不同的方向寻求艺术和生命之真的矛盾。
There is a inner conflict bewteen Ma Yiping's art and temperament, who is seeking the truth of art and life along two different directions.

在一个方向上，他试图借助生活母题构造一种充满哲思的视觉意象：那种作为器具的空瓶、土罐、道路，那种作为生存素材的花卉、水果、身体，借助这些，他的思维触及到生命的意义、存在的空虚、世界的永恒。
In one direction, he tries to use life motif to create a visual image filled with philosophy thought: the appliances such as empty bottles, amphora, road; the living material such as flowers, fruits, bodies. With all these, his thought can touch the meaning of life, void of existence, eternity of the world.

虽然有众多的构成主义和抽象主义艺术家的铺垫，这条道路依然注定充满了不定和艰险。
Although with so many constructivist and abstractionist artists as beddings, this road was still filled with uncertainty and hardship.

对马一平来说，它的最大困境是，哲思方向的油画艺术由于承载了太多的超越艺术的责任，对它的探索将迫使艺术家离自己的本性与本真越走越远。
To Ma Yiping, the most difficult part is the oil painting art of philosophy thought direction shoulders too much responsibility which has surpassed the art itself. So the exploration of oil painting art will keep the artists farther and farther away from their own nature and real spirit.

画布和油彩的厚重、生命和社会的命题、思考和画面的堆积都给艺术家产生重重压力，迫使艺术家探寻艺术另外一条可能之途：有没有一种可能，让绘画和生命的关系不是表现而是同一？
The thickness of canvas and oil paint, the proposition of life and society, the accumulation of thinking and pictures produce heavy pressures to artists, forcing them to seek another possible road of art: is there one possibility that the relation between painting and life is not expression but unification?

让艺术家在创作中直达自我的心性抒写，在绘画中体验自我心性的本真？
Can artists find their ways to express their own nature directly during the creation and experience the essence of their mind during the process of painting?

无疑，在这些年的艺术创作中，马一平时时不能忘却、不经意间挥洒而就的水墨罗汉，就代表了他艺术和心灵之矛盾的另外一极，也是他寻求艺术和生命之真的另外一个方向。
Surely, during the artistic creation these years, the Chinese ink arhat paintings, which Ma Yiping produced inadvertently, represent another pole of the conflict between his art and soul. That is also another direction of his road on seeking the truth of art and life.




促动马一平的水墨罗汉发生的，是他内心深处一直存在的对自我本真的追问。
It is his pursue to the own nature deep in his mind to make Ma Yiping devote himself into the arhat paintings.

早在求学时代他就酷爱本性和生命主题之思。
During his school days, he love to ponder over the human nature and life.

从笛卡尔、休谟到尼采、胡塞尔，西方哲学曾经是他叩击存在之门的途径。
From Descartes, Hume, to Nietzsche, Husserl, western philosophy was his key to the door of existence.

从印象派、塞尚到马列维奇、莫兰迪，现代主义艺术也曾给予他探寻存在表现之机。
From impressionism, Cezanne, to Malevich, Morandi, Modernism art gave him opportunity to explore existing and manifestation.

在他2000年左右描绘的一批以生命为主题的油画中，甚至将近十多年里在油画上所做的种种尝试，其焦点就是表达在生命之思上所获得的种种最新的经验。
In his oil painting works on the theme of life around 2000 and his many attempts over a decade, his focus is to express his newest experiences which were gained from the expression of his thinking on life.

这种渐修式的推进始终不能达到一个似乎并不遥远的原点；然而，2008年小堡时期发生的老马人生中的一个重要事件，根据他的叙述——从此开始皈依佛门，却对他的生命观嬗变发生了重大影响。
This kind of gradual pushes have never reached the original point which seems not so far. However, an important event in Ma Yiping's life in 2008 at Xiaobao Village in Beijing, when he became a Buddhist, made a significant impact on the change of his view of life.

修习佛法意味着什么？
What is Dhamma practicing mean?

这是他意识到但尚未说清楚的问题。
It is a question he has realized but cannot explain yet.

实际上，根据我的判断，皈依佛门对他的根本性影响就在于促使对生命和存在的理解从“外观”转向“内省”，从“他性”转向“自性”。
Actually, from what I can see, the fundamental effect of becoming a Buddhist is change his understanding of life and existence from "outer observation" to "inner reflection", from "otherness" to "selfness".

无疑，少年时代就曾经痴迷的周易、八卦，青年时代就倾心的水墨、书写，所含有的文化基因就是内省的。
Undoubtedly, Zhouyi and Eight Diagrams which he obsessed during his boyhood, Chinese ink painting and writing which he admired in his youth time, all the cultural gene are about "inner reflection".

但只有在这一年开始，一个超越了物质追求和生存压力的中年时代，马一平才开始彻底地把自己的身心浸润到佛学修行之中。
However, only that year, at his middle-age, when he finally go beyond the material pursuing and survival pressure, Ma Yiping began to thoroughly soak himself into Dhamma practicing.

这意味着一次关键的精神超越，一次对自我本真追问的彻底解决。
This means a decisive spiritual transcendence, a complete resolution to his own nature's exploration. 








中国佛学，尤其禅宗文化，极为推崇自性的洞达。
Chinese buddhist philosophy, especially the Zen culture, speak highly of the thorough understanding of selfness. 

自性在禅宗中即本性，佛性，心的本原。
According to Zen, selfness is one's own nature, Buddhata, and origin of heart

如五祖所言，“无上菩提，须得言下识自本心，见自本性，不生不灭，于一切时中念念自见，万法无滞，一真一切真，万境自如如，如如之心即是真实，若如是见，即是无上菩提之自性也”，本心和本性就是本真，自见本心就是无滞无碍，回归天性。
Master Wuzu said, "To attain supreme enlightenment, one must be able to know spontaneously one's own nature or essence of mind, which is neither created nor can it be annihilated. From ksana to ksana (thought-moment to thought-moment), one should be able to realize the essence of mind all the time. All things will then be free from restraint. Once the Tathata (Suchness, another name for the essence of mind) is known, one will be free from delusion forever; and in all circumstances one’s mind will be in a state of "Thusness". Such a state of mind is absolute Truth. If you can see things in such a frame of mind you will have known the essence of mind, which is supreme enlightenment.". One's own nature and essence of mind is original truth, knowing spontaneously one's own nature is returning to nature without any barrier.

禅宗的宗旨就是“直指人心，见性成佛”，这种境界把人对世界的思考归结到自性的发现、自我的实现上。
The purpose of Zen is to make people "see their heart directly, think things without ponder", this realm attributes human's thinking on the world to the discovery of mind essence and implement of selfness.

无疑，对芸芸众生而言，践行佛教修行的最好范本就是罗汉。
Therefore, to all living things, the best example of Buddhism practicing is arhat.

罗汉是凡人修行得真道者，是六根清净、解脱烦恼、超越生死、充满智慧的尊者和应真者。
Arhat is a common people, who has attained enlightment and nirvana through practice Dhamma. Arhat is free from human desires and passions, exceeding life and death, full of wisdom.

罗汉不是高高在上的神祗，而是平等对话的智者；
Arhat is not an unreachable deity, but a tangible sage;

不是威严的上苍，而是充满喜怒哀乐的人神；
he is not majestic heaven, but person with emotions;

不是完美的化身，而是有着种种怪相和不平经历的真者。
he is not a perfected avatar, but a person with flaws and rough experience.

罗汉之真道出了佛学的本质，那就是成佛的关键在于明心见性，是一种自我发现的过程。
The essece of arhat explains the nature of Buddhism, that is to find one's true self.

由于这个原因，修学罗汉，观像罗汉，描绘罗汉，拜敬罗汉，成为传统文化一道特异的风景。
For this reason, studying, observing, portraying and respecting arhat become a special feature of Chinese traditional culture.

而五代贯休开创的胡貌梵相、奇崛怪异但仪态万千、超凡脱俗的罗汉图像，成为后人理解罗汉精神的范本。
And Master Guanxiu in the Five Dynasties initiated the arhat image, which was forein-appearanced, weired-looking and  extraordinary, setting the example for later generations to understand the spirit of arhat.





马一平的佛学潜修伴随着对自性的顿悟，也伴随者对罗汉精神的发现。
Ma Yiping's Dhama practice accompanied with enlightenment of selfness and discovery of arhat spirit.

从现代艺术起步，老马曾经是一位激进的现代主义者；
Beginning from mordern art, he was once a radical modernist.

为生计所迫，老马也曾经投入到焦灼和火热的现实生活。
Forced by living, he once also dedicated himself into anxious and fierce mundane life.

然而，只有在08年后，一种静观万象、超越凡俗的真者气质才悄然成为老马特有的人格魅力。
However, after 2008, an extraordinary and refined temperament quietly began to hightlight his personality charm.

他不动声色，但潜思万里；少言寡语，但往往一语惊人；
He stays calm and collected, but diligent in thinking; he is quiet and reticent, but always goes straight to the point;

身影寂寂，但尾随着一批执著的支持者。
he is low-pitched, but with a batch of faithful supporters.

和老马交流，你完全不用担心陷入当代艺术家特有的愤世嫉俗的怪圈；
Talking to him, you completely don't have to worry about trapping into the misanthropic topics which are peculiar to contemporary artists.

他能宽容一切，理解一切，同时又有愿景超度一切，改善一切，这正是佛学“庄严国土，利乐有情”的境界。
Because he is tolerant, considerate and willing to offer help. He has reach the realm of "Buddha land of benefiting sentient beings".

实际上，马一平笔下的罗汉形象正是对他所践行的真者价值的生动阐释。
Actually, the arhat image in Ma Yiping's paintings vividly interprete the true value he is practicing.

马一平罗汉上承贯休图像正脉，下接乾隆钦定赞语，有确定可信的文化渊源。
Inheritting Master Guanxiu's essence, echoing Qianlong Emperor's comment, Ma Yiping's arhat paintings have convinced cultural origin.


但是在精神气质上，马一平的罗汉改异域性相为乱头粗服，变狰狞怪诞为憨态可掬，这是对人的天性之真的发掘，也是对他自己修行过程中从身心到相貌，从情思到仪态所发生的一系列转变的生动写照。
On spiritual temperament of arhat, Ma Yiping changes their foreign appearance into tangled hair and plain clothes, changes their weired-looing into naive charm. The changes reflect his exploration on the kindness of human nature as well as the change of his own mind, body, appearance, emotion and manner during his Dhama practice.







水墨罗汉为马一平的自性抒写提供了方便法门。
Arhat painting provides Ma Yiping opportunity for expressing his own nature.

和明代徐渭一样，老马的罗汉意象很大程度上来自他所采用的水墨语言。
As well as Xu Wei, Ma's arhat image, to a great extent, comes from the ink and water language.

不像对油画技法的多年研求，老马在罗汉绘画中所采用的笔法墨法、施水设色、位置经营等等多是无意识的。
The brushwork, ink, color and composition in his arhat painting are mostly unconscious, which was different from his long-time study on oil painting techniques.

在一幅描绘六祖慧能的画作中，老马草书“不是风动幡动，仁者心动也”的跋语，对黄庭坚笔意的把握，足见他对书写掌控的能力。
In one of his painting which portaiys Master Huineng, the cursive postscript "not the wind, nor streamers, benevolent beckoning" seizes the essence of Huang Tingjian's calligraphy, demonstrating Ma's accomplished handwriting skill.

然而据老马坦言，他从未经历遍写碑帖、临池不辍的苦修。
However, according to Ma, he never had a tough training on calligraphy.

靠的是什么？
Then what does he rely on?

永嘉大师所谓“一超直入如来地”也。
That is what Master Yongjia said, "become enlightened straight away".

马一平的罗汉写真也是如此。
As well as Ma Yiping's arhat painting.


2000年之前，画家曾尝试过一系列自谓“水墨解构”的作品，用漫画性笔法描绘生活中怪异肉体形象，但很快他就放弃了这种尝试。
Before 2000, the painter made an experiment on a painting serie called "Chinese ink deconstruction", portraying weired human body images in real life with a caricature style. But he soon dropped this idea.

很可能他意识到，那种所谓新文人画的直率和胆量，如果缺乏了文化性和超越性，将可能沦落为庶人的原始本性。
Perhaps he realized, lacking of culture and transcendence, the frankness and courage of this kind of so-called "new literati painting" could be reduced to the original nature of common people. 

而在他的水墨罗汉中，飘逸飞动的线条，随势氤氲的点染，淡雅而深邃的墨色，呈现的是超越者的气度，得道者的洒脱，一种禅宗自性的天然表达。
However, in his arhat paintings, flying and graceful lines, casual and enshrouding dots, simple and elegant colors represent the tolerance and freedom of a transcender, and a selfness natral expression of Zen.

因此，老马的水墨罗汉与其说是“书写”，不如说是“抒写”，他是用一种最为直率的方式，直接呈现充满了自性意趣的禅宗意象。
Therefore, for Ma's arhat painting, it is better to say "expressing" rather than "drawing", because he presents a Zen image full of selfness in the most straightforward way.

当然，老马的水墨如同其修行，是在一个不断的过程中，其罗汉意象、笔墨、意匠、情趣之间的契合天成，必然随着自我生命的绵延而更加完美。
Nevertheless, as well as Ma's Dhamma practicing, his painting is a continuous process. The conjunction of arhat image, brushwork, design and sentiment must be better and better in the future.











精神在高处 — 观马一平的画
于量  于金陵榴园
A Spirit Overhead - Ma Yiping's Painting

有人说，艺术使人成为人。
Some say, art makes human human.

当商业大潮以狂飙之势吹刮一切，动摇着我们精神的家园，甚至挑战着我们道德的底线时，人们似乎已经感受到冷酷到底后的寒意。
When the commercialization tide fiercely sweeps everything, shaking our spiritual homeland and even challenging our moral bottom line, it seems that everyone can feel the winter chill.

故而，艺术不妨成为慰藉心灵的最佳选择，也就是说，在当下人们正开始重新发现艺术、定位艺术。
Then, art becomes the best choice for spirit consolation. That is to say, people nowadays begin to discover and locate the art again.

显而易见，画家马一平把握住了时代的机缘。
Obviously, as a painter, Ma Yiping seize the opportunity of the era.





尽管在艺术的道路上，一平兄走得并不平坦，但他目前的状态与作品显然表明艺术已成为其精神的栖居之所。
His road of art is rugged and rough, but his status and painter works clearly indicates that art has became his spiritual homeland.

也正是如此，他使我们感受到艺术在当下人精神复归旅途中的重要性。
And just so, he makes people feel art's importance on the way home of their spirit.

从山东曹县的乡村到菏泽师专，再从其辞职来到北京画院进修，直至从北京来到山东招远，再北漂至宋庄的工作室，马一平的艺术人生可视为新一代画人的苦旅典范。
Ma Yiping's artistic life can be considered as the example of the spiritual odyssey of new generation painters. Coming from a village of Cao County, Shandong Province, he entered Heze University, and then went to study in Beijing Painting Academy after resigning from his work. After finishing the study, he came to Zhaoyuan City in Shandong, then settled down in his studio in Songzhuang Art District in Beijing.

不过，行者常至，为者常成。
However, those who keep up their efforts often achieve their goal, and those who keep on walking often reach their destination. 

他的经遇和作品已然给了我们对于当代默默奋进中的画家群体足够的信心。
His experience and painting works already gave enough confidence to other diligent painters nowadays. 






纵观马一平的绘画，我们看到了一名投身艺术者的决心与执着。
From Ma Yiping's painting works, we can see the determination and insistence of an artist who has dedicated himself to his art career. 

艺术原本就是精神的产物，若是将其机械地归结为纯粹技法的皴擦点染，那等于消解了艺术的灵魂。
Art is product of spirit. If we mechanically consider painting as pure techniques of brushworks, the soul of art will be dispelled. 

中国文人画的核心也就在于其中蕴含着深厚的道德品格与人文精神。
The core of Chinese literati painting is moral character and humanistic spirit.

马一平的画则告诉我们他对世界的“自了之道”。
Ma Yiping's paintings tell us his "selfness philosophy"

这是近乎终极的思考，但他则在鲜明的个性化语言的书写中（佛教题材的描画）领悟到了人生的真谛。
It is almost an ultimate thinking, but he has comprehended the essence of life through his individualized art language (Buddhist theme paintings).

在马一平各种面貌的作品中，我尤其喜欢他的如来造像。
Among Ma Yiping's works, I like the Buddha portrait most.

有道是：无我无人观自在，非空非色见如来。
It is said that, feeling no me, no others, no emptiness, no form, and it’s all free and easy contemplation.

由于创作状态好，且拥有技法上的自信，马一平的画总是给人轻松畅达的韵致，也即平中见奇、淡中见色。
Due to a good art creation state and confidence on technique, a common but remarkable feature highlights Ma Yiping's paintings, which always bring the viewer a pleasant and relaxed feeling.




或许是油画、国画兼善的缘故，他在国画的笔墨运用上总能不拘于陈法，有规律而无定法，“非法非非法”是也。
Perhaps it is becouse he is good at both oil painting and traditional Chinese painting, the brushwork in his traditional Chinese painting can always be free from conventions.

这种技法上超乎寻常的自由，当基于其审美内涵上明心见性、修道观境的追求。
This kind of extraordinary freedom on painting skills is based on his aesthetic connotation pursuit, which is to find one's true self.

因有着对真性的感悟，他的绘画在审美意趣上显示出一种可贵的超然之态。
With the inspiration on true self, the aesthetic interest of his painting work shows a valueable transcendent style.

画家的本心应有诗人的气度，相信马一平也是如此。
A painter's essence of mind should have the temperament of poet, so do Ma Yiping.

诗以意境胜，有境界者自成高格。
The crucial part of a peom is its image, which decides its level. 

境界的核心则在于真性的流露。
And the core of image is the expression of one's own nature.

诚如古人所云：“云栖修篁夹道，意境殊胜。”（清俞樾 《春在堂随笔》）“作诗之妙，全在意境融彻，出音声之外，乃得真味。”（明朱承爵 《存馀堂诗话》）。
As the ancients said, peoms can only be known by the comprehension of its image. 

对马一平来说，虽然当代艺术的氛围已使其作品基本解构了传统的笔墨程式，但从其画面意象可以感知，他的画在审美内涵上仍是承袭着古人的衣钵。
For Ma Yiping, the atmosphere of contemporary art has kept his paintings away from the convention of traditional Chinese painting. However, we can see from the image of his painting, the aesthetic connotation still inherits the ancient legacy.

我是说，当很多人以革新的名义视传统如敝履的时候，他的画作所呈现出的风貌应予以充分肯定。
I mean, the style and features of his painting should be highly appreciated, as many people nowadays look down upon tradition in the name of innovation.

尤其是他这样经历了当代艺术圈喧嚣与纷扰的画家的自觉选择，似乎更能说明问题。
Especially, the self-conscious choice of Ma Yiping, who has experienced the noise and distractions in contemporary art circle, is more convincible.














罗 汉
马媛媛  于首都师大
Arhat
Ma Yuanyuan in Capital Normal University


梵文音译：Arhat，巴利文：Arahant，阿罗汉，梵语阿罗汉意译为无学，无学指断尽一切烦恼，已得阿罗汉果者。
Sanskrit: Arhat, Pali: Arahant. Arhat in Sanskrit means "asaiksa", that is getting rid of all worries and attaining Arahantahood.

即，已究佛之教法，无惑可断，亦无可学者，则称为‘无学’。
That is to say, the one who has reached the enlightenment has nothing to learn.

阿罗汉亦有杀贼、无生、应供等义，罗汉者六根清净，无名烦恼已断，了脱生死证入涅，堪受尊敬供养。
The meaning of arhat also includes "foe destroyer", "ajati" and "lokavidu". Arhat deserves respect for they are free from all the human desires and passions，attaining nirvana. 

阿罗汉于寿命未尽前，仍住世间梵行少欲，戒德清净，随缘教化度众。
Before the end of life, arhat travels around, practicing and spreading Dhama in the world. 

通俗说罗汉指的是通过持戒修行，已经摆脱尘世一切烦恼的成就者。
In layman's terms, arhat is the person far advanced along the path of enlightenment, and getting rid of all the worries.







自佛陀三转法轮以来，有成千上万的弟子成就阿罗汉果，其影响雕塑和绘画艺术的罗汉，多以五百罗汉、十六罗汉和十八罗汉为经典。
Since the third Dharmacakra of Buddha, thousands of Buddhists attained Arahantahood. Arahat profoundly influences sculpture and painting, in which, the classic works include the Five Hundred Arhats, the Sixteen Arhats or the Eighteen Arahats.





罗汉在民众信仰中的流行，不但丰富了我国佛教的内涵，也成为艺术创作的重要题材。
The porpularity of arhat in common people not only enriches Buddhist connotation in China, but also becomes an important theme in art creation.

其表现方式丰富多样，以绘画和雕塑最为常见。
Painting and sculpture is two most common types among its various forms.

在我国许多的佛教圣地，常有十六罗汉、十八罗汉或五百罗汉的塑像。
The sculptures of the Sixteen Arhats, the Eighteen Arhats or the Five Hundred Arahats can be seen in many Buddhist temples in China.

而罗汉在绘画艺术中大多以十罗汉、十六罗汉和十八罗汉为主要创作形式。
And the Ten Arhats, the Sixteen Arhats or the Eighteen Arhats are also the major form of painting art.







在释迦牟尼佛的高足中，释迦身边的十大弟子即为最杰出的十大罗汉，他们法行出众，各有独特专能，是早期佛教发展的中坚力量。
Among the disciples of Buddha, the most outstanding ones are the ten arhats by his side. With their remarkable bahavior and capability, they are the backbone of early development of Buddhism.


十大罗汉第一为大迦叶，苦行第一；第二阿难陀，多闻第一；第三舍利弗，智慧第一；第四须菩提，解空第一； 第五富楼那，说法第一； 第六目犍连，神通第一；第七迦旃延，论议第一；第八阿尼律陀，天眼第一；第九优婆离，持律第一；第十罗罗，密行第一。
Among the ten arhats, the fisrt one is Mahakasyapa, who is foremost in ascetic practices; the second one is Ananda, foremost in retentive memory; the third one is Sariputta,  foremost in wisdom; the fourth one is Subhuti, foremost in understanding of emptiness; the fifth one is Punna, foremost in teaching dharma; the sixth one is Maudgalyayana, foremost in supernatural powers; the seventh one is Katyayana,  foremost in explaining Dharma; the eighth one is Aniruddha, foremost in divine insight; the ninth one is Upali, foremost in keeping precepts; the tenth one is Rahula, foremost in esoteric practice.







十大弟子造像在北魏云冈石窟就已出现，第十八洞以本尊大佛为主体，其左右东西石壁间各罗列着五位小型的比丘像，即为十罗汉。唐以后张僧繇画有佛十弟子图及十高僧图。
The portraits of the ten disciples has appeared early in Yungang Grottoes of the Northern Wei Dynasty. The ten portraits surround a major portrait of Buddha in the eighteenth cave of the grottoes. After Tang Dynasty, Zhang Sengyao painted portraits of "Ten Disciples of Buddha" and "Ten Eminent Monks".

然在当代佛教绘画中以十罗汉为表现题材的作品比较少见。
However, works themed with the ten arhats are rarely seen in contemporary Buddhist painting.


本书中所绘的十大罗汉，以水墨写意形式描绘的十罗汉，行笔洒脱，造型奇异，动态中传达着汉儒之气，在当代水墨罗汉艺术领域有着独立的精神价值。
With casual brushwork and extraordinary form, the washpaintings of ten arhats in this book, bring a confucianist temperament, reflecting an independent spirit in contemporary washpainting art of arhat.







十六罗汉在绘画领域的影响最为广泛。
In painting area, the Sixteen Arhats has the most widely influences.

公元二世纪师子国庆有尊者《法住记》最早记载了十六罗汉的名字。
The earliest record of the Sixteen Arhats' names was in the book "Sixteen Arhats and Eighteen Arhats" by Master Shiziguoqingyou in the 2nd century A.D.

直到唐朝玄奘法师翻译《法住记》时，将十六罗汉的名字译为汉语，至此十六罗汉的名字和资料都已确立，便很快流传开来，十六罗汉受到我国佛教及文人雅士的普遍信仰。
When Master Xuanzang in Tang Dynasty translate the book, the names and files of the Sixteen Arhats were translated into Chinese and began to spread. The Sixteen Arhats were soon worshipped by Buddhists and refined scholars in China.


按玄奘法师所翻译的《大阿罗汉难提蜜多罗所说法住记》中十六罗汉即：一宾度罗跋罗堕、二迦诺迦伐蹉、三迦诺迦跋厘堕、四苏频陀、五诺距罗、六跋陀罗、七迦理迦、八伐罗弗多罗、九戍博迦、十半托迦、十一怙罗、十二那伽犀那、十三因揭陀、十四伐那婆斯、十五阿氏多、十六注荼半托迦。
According to the book, the Sixteen Arhats include: Pindola, Kanakavatsa, Kanaka, Gopaka, Nagasena, Nakula, Bhadra, Kalika, Vajriputra, Subinda, Panthaka, Rahula, Angaja, Vanavasin, Ajita and Cudapanthaka.


但是《法住记》中并没有对十六罗汉的的相貌进行具体描述，造像者多根据佛教常识，结合现实生活中的僧人形象，进行艺术夸张，塑造出了不同风格清奇古怪的罗汉形象。
However, the book doesn't record the Sixteen Arhats' appearance. So the artists have to create various extraordinary even weired arhats images according to the common sense of Buddhism and the monk figures in real life.






十八罗汉之说源于唐盛于宋，是由原十六罗汉加入二尊之说，二尊说法不一，无有定论。
The theory of the Eighteen Arhats originated in Tang Dynasty, and was widly accepted in Song Dynasty. The Eighteen Arhats was made by the original Sixteen Arhats with the addition of other two. The names of the two additional arhats vary from different versions of story.

十六罗汉的真实性使得古代画家对十六罗汉最为钟爱，唐朝王维曾绘四十八幅十六罗汉图，而对后世影响最大的为五代时期禅月大师贯休的《十六罗汉图》。
The facticity of the Sixteen Arhats make them the favorite subject of ancient painters in China. Wang Wei in Tang Dynasty complished forty-eight painting works of the Sixteen Arhats. However, the most significant work in the history is Master Guanxiu's painting "Portrait of Sixteen Arhats".

唐时的佛像已渐趋世俗化，具有较强的写实性，贯休一改俗风，他笔下的十六罗汉夸张变形，富有神秘感和威慑力，有的庞眉大目，有的高颧隆鼻，面貌都是“胡貌梵相”，这种奇异之相，立意免俗。
In Tang Dynasty, the Buddha figure was gradualy secularized, becoming quite realistic. Nevertheless, on the contrary, Master Guanxiu endowed the arhats in paintings a mysterious and deterrent power by exaggeration and transformation. All the arhats in his paintings are in foreign and weird looks.

贯休绘画风格的出现深源于贯休本人的文化修养及其所处的时代背景。
The painting style of Master Guanxiu originated from his cultural cultivation and the historical background.

贯休七岁出家，日读法华经千言，过目成诵，既精奥义，且能诗善书，尤其是人物画，更是古今独步。
Becoming a Buddhist when he was seven, Master Guanxiu is proficient on lotus sutra and good at poems and calligraphy. He is widely known for his figure painting, which is prominent in Chinese art history.

有关他的罗汉画，文献中记载甚多，《益州名画录》记：（贯休）师阎立本画罗汉十六帧，庞眉大目者，朵颐隆鼻者，倚松石者，坐山水者，胡貌梵相，曲尽其态，或问之云：“休自梦中所睹尔。”
There are many documents recording his arhat paintings. According to the book "Famous Paintings in YiZhou", Master Guanxiu learned after Yan Liben, making sixteen arhat paintings, in which, all arhats are looked forein and extraordinary, some are eating, some have high noses, some lean on pinetrees and stones, some sit by hill and water. When others asked, he explained, "that is what I saw in my dream". 





贯休所处唐末五代时期，佛教自两汉之际传入我国,经魏晋至隋唐始臻极盛。
Master Guanxiu lived in the Five Dynasties, which is a special era for Buddhism.
Introduced into China in Han Dynasty, Buddhism developped through Wei, Jin and Sui Dynasty, prevailing in Tang Dynasty.

但经过唐末、五代的法难，以及朝代更迭的战乱后，经典散佚、寺院毁坏、僧侣受迫。
However, in the end of Tang Dynasty and Five Dynasties, the devastation of buddhism and the chaoes caused by rise and fall of dynasties brought a disaster to Buddhist classics, temples and monks.

在这几百年间，佛教虽未完全中断和消失，但是对于民众来说接触到佛教的机会则少而又少。
Although Buddhism didn't totally disappear over the hundreds of years, there are fewer and fewer opportunities for people to touch with Buddhism.  

因当时对罗汉的形象并没有明确的记载，至此我们以可以看出贯休所绘罗汉形象是其冥思悟对禅学的产物，是禅宗境界的幻化。
As there is no record on arhat's appearence then, we believe the arhat's image in Master Guanxiu's painting was originated from his meditation over Zen. It is the fantastic transformation of the Zen realm.

贯休曾说，这些“不类世间所传”的佛教人物形象，是他“梦中所睹尔”。
Master Guanxiu said, the images of those Buddhist figures is not from "the real life record", but "what he saw in his dream" .

因此他的”应梦罗汉”引起了佛教绘画乃至整个绘画界的追随，上千年来中国艺术家就以其为典范描绘了大量富有中国特色的罗汉艺术形象。
Later, his "dreaming arhat" was highly praised and followed by other painters. It was set as an example, for Chinese painters over a thousand years to create a large number of arhat images with Chinese characteristics.






在当代佛教绘画领域，了了居士所绘十六罗汉师古禅月，神态生动造型松散，笔墨狂放不拘小节，笔法取篆稳健有力，线条乱中有序极具古意。
In contemporary Buddhist painting area, the Sixteen Artat painted by Ma Yiping inherited the unrestrained and casual style and steady brushwork from Master Guanxiu, bringing out a elegant and classical taste.

作者用最直接的方式，呈现出充满自性意趣的禅宗意向，从其潇洒的笔触亦能够感受到他淡然的处世态度，虔诚的礼佛之心。
With the most direct way, the painter represent a Zen intention full of the interest of his own nature. The disinterested attitude to life and the devout respect to Buddha can be felt from his casual brushwork. 

马一平皈依佛门后，无挂无碍应心而作，罗汉形象更为夸张而随性，受禅机触发，禅理通于画理，在禅的灵机指引下挥毫运笔，从而获得一种高蹈出尘的狂逸旨趣，让我们能从中感受到作者深层心理的潜意识精神之境界 。
After becoming a Buddhist, Ma Yiping keeps himself away from all the worry and anxiety, creating more exaggerated and remarkable arhat images. Under the effect and direction of Zen, he has attained the transcendency, elegance and freedom, which make us feel spiritual realm in the painter's subconsciousness.











马一平  简介
Brief Introduction

1969年出生于山东曹县，祖籍山东招远，汉族，俗姓马，字一平，号自了山人、了了居士，斋号自了法苑。
Ma Yiping was born in 1969 in Cao County, Shandong Province. His ancestral home is Zhaoyuan City in Shandong. His literals include "Ziliao Shanren", "Liaoliao Jushi" and "Ziliao Fayuan".

自幼受家传影响喜好字画，少年时流落他乡，居无定所。
Influenced by family tradition, Ma has been fond of calligraphy and painting since childhood. Ma left the hometown travelling around during his early life.

大学时期受西方文化影响较深，1991年随恩师董青源北京学习，后流落北京演易数年，
Western culture deeply impressed him during his college time. He learned after his teacher Mr. Dong Qingyuan in Beijing, 1991, then staying in the city for years. 

1993年返故里山东招远，淘金之余从事油画创作十余载，后转向儒释道传统文化的研究学习，
He came back to his hometown, Zhaoyuan City of Shandong Province in 1993, engaging in oil painting for over a decade while running a business. Later, he devoted into the study on Chinese traditional culture of Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism.

多年潜心于传统佛教题材十六罗汉的研究与创作，作品多受“禅月大师”贯休的影响，
After concentration on the study and creation of the traditional Buddhism painting "Sixteen Arhats" for many years, most of his works are influenced by Guanxiu, the "Master Chanyue".

在当代佛教绘画领域别开生面，作品风格古灵潇洒、笔墨狂放，不拘小节。
With a natural, unrestrained and casual style, his works break a fresh ground in contemporary Buddhist painting area.

2007年中央美院学习当代艺术，同年落居北京宋庄小堡、喇嘛庄，
He studied contemporary art in Central Academy of Fine Arts, then settled down at Xiaobao Village and Lama Village in Songzhuang Art District in Beijing.

后皈依佛门，随西藏埃旺寺金刚上师根秋泽翁修习密乘宁玛派教法，法号向曲敦珠。
He later became a Buddhist, following Vajra Master Gengqiu Zeweng of Aiwang Temple in Tibet to practice Nyingma of Tantra doctrine, with the Dharma name of Xianqu Dudjom.





智慧第一舍利弗
Foremost in Wisdom - Sariputta

解空第一须菩提
Foremost in the Understanding of Emptiness - Subhuti

多闻第一阿难陀
Foremost in Retentive Memory - Ananda

天眼第一阿尼律陀
Foremost in Divine Insight - Aniruddha

神通第一目犍连
Foremost in Supernatural Powers - Maudgalyayana

持戒第一优婆离
Foremost in Keeping Precepts - Upali 

说法第一富楼那
Foremost in Teaching Dharma - Punna

头陀第一摩诃迦叶
Foremost in Ascetic Practices - Mahakasyapa

议论第一迦旃延
Foremost in Explaining Dharma - Katyayana

密行第一罗睺罗
Foremost in Esoteric Practice - Rahula


十六罗汉
The Sixteen Arhats

尊者度拔
Pindola

尊者迦伐蹉
Kanakavatsa

尊者堕誓
Kanaka

尊者拔迦
Gopaka

尊者迦犀
Nagasena

尊者提蜜多友
Nakula

尊者没跋
Bhadra

尊者迦理迦
Kalika

尊者伐那弗多
Vajriputra

尊者戍迦
Subinda

尊者半托迦
Panthaka

尊者怙
Rahula

尊者因揭
Angaja

尊者伐婆斯
Vanavasin

尊者阿氏多
Ajita

尊者注荼半托迦
Cudapanthaka
